 
TUM Global & Alumni Office  
Techni cal University of Munich   
  
      
 
Statement of Purpose  
Please use English when filling in this form and write full sentences. However, be specific  and keep it 
short . Please  only fill in one form for your two chosen university destination s. Safe the file as a pdf 
document and upload it to  the online application form  in MoveON . 
 
A) Motivation to go abroad  
1.) Please describ e up to 3 aspects  how a stay abroad would enrich you academically ? 
At first s tudying abroad would allow me to experience different academic cultures and 
learning methods  from pro fessors and students . My prioritized u niversities  UC San Diego and  
the Hon g Kong Uni versity of Science and Technolog y teach  interactive  and real-world 
oriented  learning  in small classes, which enables close contact to professors . Experiencing 
this contrast to the  studies at TUM would deepen my understanding of how knowledge  is 
trans ferred a nd show me ways of learning I could inte grate into my studie s at TU M. Honestly, 
I have never had a longer conversation with a professor at TUM. I would love to be able to 
learn directly, what it feels like to  have the privilege and pressure of teaching bright , young 
minds. I think this would extr emely  strengthen  my mindset towar ds seeing education as an 
interplay between students and professors  “against ” real-world problems , not students 
“against ” professor . A mindset which in my view se ems to have emerged  in some  student’s  
minds . It would strengthen my ability to think critically  through the differences in t eaching 
methods and content , adapt to diverse learning environments  amongst other students , and 
connect theoretical frameworks from TUM with practical, real -world contexts.  
Secondly a semester abro ad, and at these t wo universities in particular , would  give me the 
opportunity t o take specialized courses that complement my Information  System studies at 
TUM. In both the technical and the management persp ective. For example,  in fields like 
machine learning, a rtificial intellig ence an d techn ology in finance . Both UC San Diego  and 
HKU ST offer stron g interdisc iplinary programs that link technology , management and 
entrepreneurship. En gaging in project -based co ursework and collaborating with students from 
various backgrounds would not only im prove  my technical knowledge , but also my ability to 
approach comple x business problems from mult iple perspectives.  
Finally , the two languages English and Chinese will both enrich me in e very professional 
envir onment . Both California an d Hong Kong are glo bal hubs for inno vation and technology . 
One as the birth place of digital  economy and  located in  the state of Silicon V alley, the other 
as a gateway  to the upcoming economic superpower, Asia . Experiencing such environments  
firsthand  would allow me to see how unive rsities , startups and established companies 
collaborate to turn research in to real world impact. Streng thening my lang uage skills , in either  
TUM Global & Alumni Office  
Techni cal University of Munich   
  
      
 
of the lang uages,  would  deeply  help me being part of these unique ecosystems and bring 
them to TUM ’s ecosystems and my future car eer. 
2.) Please describe up to 3 aspects how a stay abroad would enrich you on a personal 
level ? 
First,  living an d studying in a  completely new country and continent  would challenge me to 
leave my comfort zone , pushing me to adapt to unf amiliar situati ons, and bu ild my character 
no other e xperience would be able to . From managing my day-to-day life to na vigating in the 
new academic surrounding s I would de velop a  new level of independence . One thing  I would 
love to especially develop i s being  more confident  when approa ching st rangers. I am super 
interested in getting to know new people, but often I am too cautious to approach . Being 
thousands of kilometers away from home, my parents, my brother , my dog and my girlfriend , 
whom I miss already, knowing no one , I don ’t have a choice other to approach and  get to 
know other  open -minded pe ople, from whom I can learn incredible things . 
Furthermore,  interacting with students from a round the world would allow me to build genuine 
intercultural  competence . At universities like U C San Die go and  the H ong Kong Univers ity of 
Science and Technology  I would meet peers of a great va riety of cultural and ac ademic 
backg rounds . My experiences as a volunteer language mentor for refugees have  already 
taught me how v aluable empathy and com munication are  when overcoming  cultural 
differences . These are skills I want to strengthen in my semester abro ad to also be a more 
cultural aware and unde rstanding person back in Germany.  
At last, a semester abro ad would help  me to c onnect and build a network with people who are 
as passionate about technology , innovation and management as I a m. Whether through 
group p rojects  or student clubs, which I want to be part of in my semester abro ad. I hope to 
make las ting friend s and build valuable professional relationships for m y ent ire career. I  
always remember my f ather and his best frie nd, who have met abroad and still are in close 
contact today. This is what I would love to achieve  as well. Th is would shape me to a  more 
open -minde d, curious and globally thinking person. Wh ich in my opinion will be e ven more 
crucial  in a further and further  interconnec ted world of business  and technology.  
3.) Which challenges  could you face during your stay ab road and how would you handle 
them ?  
Integrating into a completely new academic and person al environment will bring some 
challenges , especially in the beginning. Every university , every country and city has its own 
rhythm  and way of life , which  I will ha ve to adapt to. To manage this, I plan to attend all 
introduction ev ents and orientation s essions  to meet peers and local students which can help 
me to integrate. My openness  and curiosity will help me a dapt quickly and make the most out 
of my stu dy abroad .  
TUM Global & Alumni Office  
Techni cal University of Munich   
  
      
 
Furthermore,  being in a new country of course is also overwhelming, positively  speaking . The 
variety of new events, places and  new interesting people to meet  can make it challenging to 
not forget the academic background of the stay. To hand le this, I rely on my structured stud y 
habits I developed at TUM, wh ere self -studying is  the main part of my bachelor's  degree . 
Consiste nt weekly planning , prioritizing and time blocking  are methods I have integrated into 
my day -to-day life  at TUM, which worked really well for me . This w ill allow me to stay 
acad emically on track with my studies, while  being able to e xplore the new culture  as well as 
peop le and grow personally.  
Living ab road, thousand s of kilometers from home in a diff erent time  zone , with a different  
climate  will be chall enging as well . Nevertheless,  I already moved several hours a way w hen 
coming to Munich an d have traveled both  the US and C hina which makes me confident, that I 
am going to handle these challenges an d have a great time abroad.  
4.) Why did you choose  a university in the United States  (first preference) ? Please  
describe  up to  3 aspects that attract you to this country in particular.  
In the past years I have  been deeply interested in reading books and listening to talks form 
people like Alex Karp, Warren Buffe tt and  Reid Hoffman,  which made  the United States  and 
especially California the te chnological and entre preneurial epicenter of the wo rld. No other 
country has influenced the world as much as the US . Even in Germany , our products, our 
movies, our songs even our way of life an d politics  are massively influenced by the US , 
probably more than by every other country. At this moment , while this dynamic seems to be 
shifting, I would like to understand  how the  United S tates is changing or  has already changed . 
How true a re the  perceived shifts in world order d ominated by the US, which are emphasized 
so hea vily in our media? In which state will I experience the United States of America? It 
remains  home to world -leading  companies , research institutions  and startups , which 
continuously  redefi ne how technolo gy shapes o ur lives. Experiencing this environment would 
allow me  to understand how inn ovation is driven by a  unique combination of academi c 
excellence  and entrepreneurial  spirit. This  experimental mind set and p ermanent improvement 
perfectly reflect the values I want to inte grate into my studies and future career . 
Further more , the universities in America are known for openness  and a strong focus on 
project -based , hands -on learning in small groups. Studying in such a n environment  with such 
a mindset helps me to strengthen abilities like thinking independently  and approach problems 
in teams, comple menting the analyti cal and t heoretical knowledge  I have gained at TUM.  
Lastly, there is probably no other country with a diversity in cultures, backg rounds, ideas and 
nature like the US. Livi ng and studying in such  an environment w ould allow me to broaden my 
view of the world and improve my communicati on skills. California , in particular , stands for 
openness, ambition and c reativity, which would  help me for my persona l development  and 
give me the opportunity to have a  meaningful exchange between  students and citizens from 
all over the world. Bey ond San Diego  and California,  I am eager to visit the great nature ,  
TUM Global & Alumni Office  
Techni cal University of Munich   
  
      
 
national parks and cities in the United States , like Yosemite National Park , the Grand Canyon  
and San Francisco .  
   
TUM Global & Alumni Office  
Techni cal University of Munich   
  
      
 
5.) Only if your second preference is in a different country: Why did you choose  a 
university in  China  (second preference) ? Please  describe up to 3 aspects that attract 
you to this country . 
During my previous visit to Hong Kong in 2024, I was deeply fascinated by the city ’s 
atmosphere . On one side the Asian calm and discipline combined with British culture  and 
understatement.  The city ’s cleanliness, structure, and respect for order , combined with its 
internation al and E nglish-influenced character, left a lasting imp ression on me. The great 
food, huge skyscrapers  and welcoming people have made Hong K ong a place I have wanted 
to return to for a longer time -period ever since . Being able to return to Hong Kong and visit 
further beautiful  and inspiring  places in Hong Kong and China mainland would allow me to 
deepen my understanding of the region ’s culture , unique history  and rapid technologi cal 
development . 
Hong Kong stands out to me as a place where innovation, glo bal business, and cultu ral 
diversity  come together in a way that exists nowhere else . As a global financial and 
technological hub with strong ties to both Asia and the Western world, it offers a  unique  view 
on how the two major t opics of my  bachelor ’s, digitalization and entrepreneurship shape 
modern econom ies. Exper iencing this  first-hand would allow me  to understand how growth 
through technology and digitalization  works  in one of the most  dynamic  and innovative 
regions of the world.  
Finally,  I believe this environment would  make Hong Kong the perfect place for my academic 
and personal growth. Its educational spirit and universities , especially HKU ST, are among 
Asia’s best, combining research  with practical solut ions. Living and studying  in such a fast -
paced , dynamic setting would challenge me to step outs ide my comfort zone and b roaden my 
global view, like no other place could  be able to . I would love to make this development  and 
see it as essential for both my academic and personal growth . 
6.) Going abroad with TUMexchange means also that you will represent TUM as an 
ambassador . Please describe up to 3 aspects that you would highlight about TUM.  
At first, I would hi ghlight that TUM and both UC  San D iego as well as HKU ST share th e same 
motivation  towar ds combining research -driven  innovation and entrepreneurial sp irit. TUM , as 
well as the other two universit ies, values research that translates into real-world  impact. With 
its close ties to industry, similar  as th e other two mentione d universities, its ow n startup 
incuba tor, TUM strengthens a culture where students are encour aged to think 
entrepreneurially and de velop new ideas . 
TUM is a university fo r everyone, de spite of c ulture or religion.  Here at TUM , as a home to 
diversity and international c ommunity , we value collaboration, openness , and mutual resp ect 
for everybody who w ants to visit and stu dy abroad at our univers ity. I would  highlight  TUM ’s  
TUM Global & Alumni Office  
Techni cal University of Munich   
  
      
 
welcoming  and ambitious en vironment , which m otivate s students to stri ve for excellence  
while rema ining curious and resp onsible in thei r global eng agement.  I always remember that 
Prof. Hofmann told u s, speaking at the TUM we lcome days, that more than 50% of TU M’s 
master students are not German. For me, this  is what lived diversity embedded into our 
culture at TUM looks like. This is what I a m proud to share to my peers abroad.  
Moreover , TUM is among the best universities in Euro pe for studies like computer science, 
engineering , and management, which  is something  I would highlight  to my peers  as well . I 
would  underline  the interdisciplinary mindset at TU M, which can be s een in my studies  
Information Systems,  which encourages innovati ve thinking and pre pares students to close 
the gap be tween technology and  business applications.  
B) Academic p lan   
For University UC San Diego  (First Preference)   
1.) Please explain  why you have chosen this university . (If your chosen university     
offers a special university program (e.g. GP, SRS) please name it here.)  
Firstly, the University o f California San Diego is  located in the technological heart of the world 
and the US, California. As bi rthplace of the most influential technolog ies of our time , 
respo nsible for so many curre nt developments  all around the world , California and UC San 
Diego have to  be the first option to choose as an Information Systems student. Apple , 
Google, Meta, NVID IA, T esla, OpenAI and so man y more were all founded in California. 
Qualcomm even directly in San  Diego. Experiencing this environ ment between technology 
and entrepreneur ship with clo se connection between universities, startu ps and ind ustry , 
turning ideas rapid ly into  innovations,  has been my dream for many years.  Getting to know  
this culture would allow me to understand how colla boration, creativity and taking risks drive 
economic development , which perfectly f its into my Information Sy stem studies at TUM  and 
how I can use this valuable  knowle dge beyond my bachelor ’s. 
The Universit y of California , San Die go is among  the world’s  leading universities  in my 
passions  Computer Science , AI and Machine Learning , known for its interdisciplinary 
approach and strong research orientation.  Through th e University  & Pro fessional Studies 
(UPS) Program , I would have the unique opportunity to attend regular UC San Diego courses 
and work with local and internation al students. This structure allows me to engage directly 
with the world class faculty of UC SD an d gain practical  experience through projects.  
Initiatives like T he Bas ement , which connect  ideas of students w ith UCSD’s network , build 
start-ups with real impact,  which  perfectly show s this motivation . I would really enjoy learning 
in these structures to develop into being able to not on ly know and understand theoretical 
concepts but  apply them in our economy and business world.  Maybe these learni ngs could be 
the key for me to build up a successful  start-up myself.   
TUM Global & Alumni Office  
Techni cal University of Munich   
  
      
 
At last California ’s unique mix of cultures and ide as creates a n inspiring at mosphere. The 
open -minded way of life , especially regar ding technology and entr epreneurship , offers an 
ideal  setting for  intellectual  and personal development. For me this opportunity is not only a 
chance to study in world -class  environment among some of the brightest people  but also to 
immerse myself in a  culture that celebr ates inno vation  and dive rsity, which are qualities I 
hope to carry forwar d in my future academi c, pro fessional , and personal  life.   
2.) Please list your planned course choices  and how they fit in with  your TUM studie s. 
Throughout my exchange at UC San Diego, I plan to align my studies with TUM ’s 
recommende d stu dy plan for the 5th semester. I int end to take electives  in Economic s and 
Com puter Science that are not readily available at TUM to benefit from U C San Diego ’s 
strengths and teaching culture. In addition,  I plan to take on e course that c an be recognized 
toward my modu le Business Anal ytics and Machine Learning at TUM . 
Economics:  
- Quantit ative Methods in Business  
- AI and Technology Strategy  
- Advanced Accountin g 
- Mergers and Acquisitions  
Computer Science:  
- Introduction to Artificial Intelligence  
- Building and  Programming Electro nic Devices  
- Introduction to P rogramming Contests  
- Deep Learning  
- Foundations of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
Interdisciplinary  (Überfachliche Grundlagen) : 
- Economics, Politics  and International Change  
- Culture , Art and Technol ogy 
- Negotiations  
- Data E thics 
By combining these m odule s, I aim to fulfill my Computer Science el ective  (5 ETCS) , my 
Economics elective (6 ETCS) and an equivalent for Business Analytics and Machine L earning 
in my TUM curriculum. If any issues regarding course enrollment occur, I remain fle xible to 
select other courses within Economics, C omputer S cienc e, or Interdisciplinary Studies to 
complete the remaining 5 ETCS in my plan.  
3.) How are you going to plan your studies at TUM around possibly differing semester 
times  abroad?   
TUM Global & Alumni Office  
Techni cal University of Munich   
  
      
 
At UC San Diego , the academic term corresponding to TUM ’s winter semes ter runs from 
September to December . This period aligns ver y well with my studies at TUM. I plan to 
complete all my exams from my summer  semester, which usually end in mid-August , giving 
me enough time to make final prepa ration s before begin ning my e xchange in September . 
When returning to Germany , I will be available to participate in any remaining TUM exams, if 
there are  administrative matters related to credit trans fer and c ourse recognition.  
For University Hong Kong Uni versity of Science and Technology  (Second  
Preference)  
1.) Please explain  why you have chosen this university . (If your chosen university offers 
a special university program (e.g. GP, SRS) please name it here.)  
For me the Hong K ong University of Science and Technology is the perfect fit for m y 
semester abroad. Combining world -class research , innovation , and entrepreneurship  with the 
unique fla ir of Hong Kong , makes th e HKUST my choice for personal and academi c 
development  
Former HKUST exch ange student s, whom  I have contacted , told me about the amaz ing, 
modern campus they were able to e xperience throughout their stay a broad. For me it is 
fascinating how Asia, and Hong Kong in particular , advanced and built-up wealth throughout 
the past centuries. I see it as a hug e privilege , being able to learn from these bright minds on 
how te chnology and entrepreneurship  go hand in hand to build great products for society  and 
econom ic rise. Something the Hong Kong University of Science an d Technology knows more 
about than  probably any  other universit y. 
What fascinate s me most about the Hong Kong Unive rsity of Science and T echnology is its  
strong focus on the fields I am  most passionate in, technology , innovation and how they can 
be integrated into products. The university is known for combining research in computer 
scien ce, business, and dat a analytics , something which perfectly matches with my curriculum 
and motivations as an Information  Systems stude nt. Its School of Business and Management  
is consistently ranked among the best in A sia, and the Department of Com puter S cience and 
Engineering is internationally recognized fo r its research in the f ields of arti ficial intelligence  
and financial technology. For me there is simply no better match in Asia th an HKUST, whic h 
strengths  match my interest perfe ctly. I am especially impresse d by HKUST engagement to 
connecting students with start-ups and industry partners through  initiatives like the 
Entrep reneurship Center and Hackathon events, which create a culture  where ide as are 
quickly turned into impact . This is exactly what I am looking for in my semester abroad.  
2.) Please list your planned course choices  and how they fit in with  your TUM studies.   
TUM Global & Alumni Office  
Techni cal University of Munich   
  
      
 
The Fact sheet states that HKUST adv ises e xchange students to ta ke a tot al load of 15 
credits, with 12 being the mini mum and 1 8 the maximum. Furthermore,  HKUST explain s that 
one course usually carries 3 credits. For th is reason,  I am planning  to choose 5 courses  out of 
the courses b elow (from the link in the TUM D atabase) , remaining flexible if organizational 
issues regarding course selection occurs . These  courses will be two elective courses  in 
Computer Science, one ele ctive course in Eco nomics, one interdi sciplinary study 
(Überfachliche Grundlagen) , and one course that is equivalent to the  course Business 
Analytics and Machine Learning at TUM , which perfe ctly matches my curriculum  in Munich . 
Economics:  
- Software Development with C++ for Quantitative Finance  
- Artificial Intelligence fo r Financial  Economi cs 
- Introduction to Econometrics  
- International  Finance & Open  Economy  Macro 
Computer Science:  
- Big Data Mining  and Management  
- Machine Learning  
- Fundamentals of Ar tificial Intelligen ce 
- Blockchain , Cryptocurrencies and Smart Contracts  
Interdiscip linary:  
- Artificial Intelligence Et hics 
- Business Case Analyse s 
- The Cantonese  Language  
- Modern C hinese History  
3.) How are you going to plan your studies at TUM around possibly differing semester 
times  abroad?  
At the Univer sity of Hong Kong , the academ ic term corresponding to TUM ’s winter se mester 
runs from Septem ber until January /Februar y, which largely o verlaps with TUM ’s own winter 
semester schedule . Therefore, the tim ing fits very well with my studies at TUM. I pl an to 
complete all my exams from the summer  semester  in Muni ch, which usually last u ntil mid -
August. This should not be a problem . During my exchange I will focus  on my courses at 
HKU ST to mak e sure that I can transfer the necessary number  of credits from HKU ST to 
TUM for my 5th semester.  
C) Foreign l anguages  
1.) ONLY  if you are apply ing for Universities in Latin America or in Quebec : Please   
TUM Global & Alumni Office  
Techni cal University of Munich   
  
      
 
explain how you are planning to reach the required Spanish/Portuguese/French  
level for your host university . 
 
   
TUM Global & Alumni Office  
Techni cal University of Munich   
  
      
 
2.) ONLY  if you are applying for countries with a non -European official language  (e.g. 
China or Japan) . Even if you are planning to take English -taught courses, basic 
knowle dge of the language of the host country  can be very useful. Have you been 
studying that language ? Where? And w hat is your level?  Or are you planning t o take 
classes in the language of the host country?  Please explain . 
I have already gained some basic knowledge  of Mandarin through pri vate lessons and during 
a previous tr ip to China, where I was able to get a first impression of the language and 
culture. If I am accepted for an exchange in Hong Kong , I plan to continue  studying both  
Cantonese , the local language in Hong Kong,  and Mandarin through language courses 
offered at “TUM S prachzentrum ” as well as private in tensive lessons. My goal is to  reach  a 
solid conversational level that allows me to communicate in everyday situations and better 
understand the local culture. I believe that learning the language is an essential part to make 
the most out of  my exchange.  
D) Financing your s tay abroad  
We would like you to seriously plan in advance, how you can finance your stay abroad. 
Participation in TUMexchange does not involve any scholarship. How are you going to 
finance your stay  abroad? Please note that your financial background does not have 
an impact on the selection process.  
I have already discu ssed m y financial plan with my parents, who will support me during my 
stay abroad , covering  tuition , housing , and everyday  costs. In addition , I hav e saved m oney 
over the past years and plan to continue working during the semester breaks to contri bute to 
my expen ses. This combination of family support, person al savings , and part -time work 
ensures that I can finance my sem ester a broad resp onsibly. 
E) Community e ngagement  
Here you can list ways in which you are actively involved in social activities (e.g. 
participation in buddy programs, student councils, etc.) which may be important to 
qualify you for your stay abroad.  
I am activel y invol ved as a volunteer language mentor for refuge es at Little World gUG , 
helping them integrate into everyday life in Germany  and improve their German  skills. 
Through this role, I have learned ho w to communi cate across cultural and  language  barriers , 
listen wi th empathy  and support others in  achieving their goals . This experien ce has 
strengthened  my inter cultural understan ding and patien ce, qualities that I consider es sential 
when represen ting TUM abroad  and engagi ng with people f rom di fferent backgrounds.   
TUM Global & Alumni Office  
Techni cal University of Munich   
  
      
 
In addition,  I have worked as a junior coach at my local tenni s club , TC Diedesfeld e.V., 
where I trained younger players and organized tournaments. This re sponsibility has helped 
me develop leadershi p, teamwork and org anization al skills.  
Moreover , I contribut e to the EveryNameCount s initiative, a digital  memorial project dedicated 
to preser ving the stories of victims of Nat ional So cialism . Participating  in this project has 
deepened my awareness of histori cal backgrounds , which I see as very important when being 
a respect ful student abroad  in a new culture . 
Together , these activities  show  my commitment to commu nity involvement , intercultural 
understan ding an d using technology for soc ial good . These are the  values that I ai m to bring 
to my e xchange semester and represent  as a TUM a mbassador abroa d. 
 
 